---
layout: post
title: A Large Detour Into the Land of Static Site Generators
---
Already, I am running into a switch of my experimental order - static site generators kind of expect to be in play from the start of development - If I first build the website in pure HTML, then pick & add a static site generator, I'm going to be doing a lot of duplicative work to move the pure HTML into the structure my SSG of choice wants me to use. So, I will start by firing up my SSG, then I'll build within that as if I'm just using HTML and the very basics of the SSG. Which brings me to the question, which SSG to use?

My previous website was built using Jekyll. I like Jekyll, it works great with GitHub pages (where I host my personal site for free) and I've never really had any major issues with it. But, I thought to myself, it's been a long time! I'm sure there's something newer and fancier out there I could try! So off to Jamstack (https://jamstack.org/generators/) I go. Next.js seems cool, but using React for templates kind of seems counterintuitive to the whole idea of this project. Gatsby and Nuxt, same issue. But Hugo! That seems interesting! 

So, I tried out Hugo. It was really easy to get started, very easy to install, and easy to spin up a new site. And it certainly generates sites fast! But I quickly discovered that it's quite opinionated, and Go is quite weird. I can work around the opinionated-ness of the default themes and templates of Hugo, but it's kind of a pain. And I don't really have a huge desire to learn Go currently, since as a design and front end guy this small personal project is the only instance where I'd really be using it. 

Which ended up bringing me right back around to Jekyll. Why change in the first place? It's been working great this whole time. Plus, I'm already decently well-versed in its Liquid templating language. A language, I may add, that was originally developed for and by Shopify, an increasingly important platform as e-commerce starts to move back away from the Amazon's of the web and back towards smaller independent sites. Not exactly an out of date language. Liquid also has enough similarities to Jinja (and therefore Hubspot's Hubl) that it sped up my learning process when I had to quickly learn Hubl for a client that wanted their site build in Hubspot's (surprisingly robust) website platform. Jekyll is also much more willing to take in basic HTML as it's templates without any fancy templating going on to start with. Given my goal of starting with as close to plain HTML as possible and building from there, Jekyll seems like the right choice for this specific project.

"Okay, great! Back to Jekyll! This is familiar territory!" I think to myself. And then run headfirst into ruby. In the ease of running a single `brew` command on my Mac to get Hugo running, I forgot about the fun of out of date preinstalled MacOS ruby versions, rbenv, chruby, and ruby gems. So, I spent a couple hours messing around and upgrading all the out of date ruby stuff on my machine from the last time I did major dev work on my website. And it didn't work. For some reason, `gem install Jekyll` was failing to compile every time, with the error "Failed to build gem native extension". So I spent a few more hours investigating, trouble shooting, installing, uninstalling, and generally pulling my hair out - and came across this GitHub issue - https://github.com/eventmachine/eventmachine/issues/990 - and just like the users here, `ruby -rrbconfig -e 'puts RbConfig::CONFIG["CXX"]'` is spitting out `false` -  ruby is having issues with clang++. Seems people are having this issue when they move from non-apple silicon to apple silicon - but I'm pretty sure I did a fresh install when I got my M1 MacBook Air. Though that was many years ago so I can't remember for sure. I guess it just reinforces my usual desire to do fresh installs on new devices instead of migrations. 

Anyway, I uninstalled and reinstalled Xcode Command Line Tools, as well as Ruby - and finally, IT WORKS! I can successfully install Jekyll! I would have much rather spent those many hours working on the site, but oh well. Goes to show how cool it is that Hugo is a single binary - for all the hours I spent getting Ruby fixed on my machine, I could have learned quite a lot of Go!  